Moyers: AND I'M BILL MOYERS.
WELCOME.
EVERY WEEK AT THIS TIME WE'LL BE
HOLDING A KALEIDOSCOPE UP TO THE
LIGHT AND TURNING IT TO SEE
IDEAS AND EVENTS THROUGH
DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES.
I'VE BEEN A JOURNALIST SINCE I
WAS 16 YEARS OLD, WITH A DETOUR
HERE AND THERE, AND IT'S JUST AS
EXCITING AS EVER TO CATCH A GUST
OF NEWS AND RIDE IT TO SOME
FRESH INSIGHT AND UNDERSTANDING.
BUT EVENTS COME FASTER THAN EVER
AND THE NEWS FROM MANY MORE
PLACES-- YOUTUBE, THE WEB,
SATELLITE RADIO, iPODS--  SO A
WEEKLY JOURNAL WILL REFLECT A
VARIETY OF SOURCES.
FOR EXAMPLE, I START MY DAY WITH
JOSH MARSHALL AND END IT WITH
JON STEWART. ONE'S A JOURNALIST;
THE OTHER SAYS HE IS JUST A
COMIC, BUT I THINK HE'S REALLY
KIDDING.
A LOT OF THINGS THAT GO
WITH PORK.
THIS BILL GIVES PILES OF
MONEY TO SHRIMPERS, AND PEANUT
STORAGE.
PEANUT STORAGE.
IN FACT THE DEMOCRATIC BILL
HAS $74 MILLION FOR PEANUT
STORAGE IN THE IRAQ
APPROPRIATIONS BILL.
I CAN IMAGINE HOW THAT
NEGOTIATION WENT: YES, YES, WE
BOTH HAVE OUR PROBLEMS.
YOU HAVE AN UNWINABLE WAR
SINKING AMERICA INTO A
PERMANENT MORAS, AND I HAVE MY
OWN PROBLEM.
ING UP ON "THE JOURNAL" JON
STEWART OF "THE DALEY SHOW"
AND JOSH MARSHALL OF "TALKING
POINTS MEMO.
Moyers: WITH ME NOW IS JON
STEWART.
WELCOME TO "BILL MOYERS
JOURNAL."
THANK YOU FOR BEING WITH ME, JON
STEWART.
MY ABSOLUTE PLEASURE.
WELCOME BACK.
VERY EXCITED TO SEE YOU BACK ON
THE TELEVISION.
Moyers: I'M GLAD TO BE HERE,
BUT, YOU KNOW, I... I'M HERE
ONLY BECAUSE I APPLIED FOR A JOB
AS A CORRESPONDENT ON THE "DAILY
SHOW" AND YOU TURNED ME DOWN.
WE HAVE STANDARDS.
ANYBODY WITH THE KIND OF
JOURNALISM EXPERIENCE AND
PROFESSIONALISM THAT YOU HAVE
DISPLAYED OVER THESE YEARS CAN
NOT WORK FOR MY PROGRAM.
Moyers: YOU'VE SAID MANY
TIMES, "I DON'T WANT TO BE A
JOURNAL... I'M NOT A
JOURNALIST."
AND WE'RE NOT.
Moyers: BUT YOU'RE ACTING
LIKE ONE.
YOU'VE... YOU'VE ASSUMED THAT
ROLE.
THE YOUNG PEOPLE THAT WORK WITH
ME NOW THINK THEY GET BETTER
JOURNALISM FROM YOU THAN THEY DO
FROM THE SUNDAY MORNING TALK
SHOWS.
I CAN ASSURE THEM THEY'RE NOT
GETTING ANY JOURNALISM FROM US.
WE ARE... IF ANYTHING I DO
BELIEVE WE FUNCTION AS A SORT OF
EDITORIAL CARTOON, THAT WE ARE A
DIGESTIVE PROCESS, LIKE SO MANY
OTHER DIGESTIVE PROCESSES THAT
GO ON.
THE THING ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
THERE'S A LOT OF YOUNG PEOPLE
GET THIS AND, YOU KNOW, YOUNG
PEOPLE GET THAT FROM ME.
PEOPLE ARE VERY SOPHISTICATED
CONSUMERS OF INFORMATION, AND
THEY'RE PULLING ALL DIFFERENT
THINGS.
IT'S... IT'S... IT'S THE SAME
ARGUMENT PEOPLE SAY ABOUT THE
BLOGS: THE BLOGS ARE
RESPONSIBLE.
NO, THEY'RE NOT.
THE BLOGS ARE LIKE ANYTHING
ELSE.
YOU JUDGE EACH ONE BASED ON ITS
OWN VERACITY AND INTELLIGENCE
AND ALL OF THAT.
AND IF YOU LIKE, YOU COULD
CHERRY-PICK ONLY THE THINGS THAT
YOU AGREE WITH FROM VARIOUS
THINGS.
OR IF YOU WANT YOU CAN TRY AND
GET A BROADER PERSPECTIVE, OR
YOU CAN FIND PEOPLE WHO ARE
ABSOLUTELY OUT OF THEIR MINDS OR
FIND PEOPLE THAT ARE DOING
INCREDIBLY COMPLEX AND
INTERESTING AND URGENT
JOURNALISM.
AND THE SAME GOES FOR OUR SHOW.
IT'S A PRISM INTO PEOPLE'S OWN
IDEOLOGIES WHEN THEY WATCH OUR
PROGRAM.
THIS IS JUST OUR TAKE.
Moyers: BUT IT ISN'T JUST
YOU.
SOMETIMES YOU'LL START A RIFF,
YOU'LL START DOWN THE PATH OF A
JOKE, AND IT'S ABOUT BUSH OR
ABOUT CHENEY, AND THE AUDIENCE
WILL GET IT; YOUR LIVE AUDIENCE
WILL GET IT.
THEY'LL START APPLAUDING EVEN
BEFORE THEY KNOW THE PUNCH LINE,
AND I'M THINKING, "OKAY, THEY
GET IT.
THAT'S HALF THE COUNTRY."
WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER HALF OF THE
COUNTRY?
ARE THEY PAYING ATTENTION?
THEY DON'T CARE, THEY DON'T...
THEY WOULD... THEY WOULDN'T
LISTEN TO THE JOKE.
IF THEY DID, THEY WOULDN'T GET
IT?
WELL, I DO THINK THAT SENSE
OF HUMOR GOES AS FAR AS OUR
IDEOLOGY.
--AS YOUR IDEOLOGY.
I THINK THAT ULTIMATELY WE HAVE
WE HAVE VERY INTERESTING
REACTIONS ON OUR SHOW.
PEOPLE ARE CONSTANTLY SAYING, "I
LOVE YOUR... YOUR SHOW IS SO
FUNNY, UNTIL YOU MADE A JOKE
ABOUT GLOBAL WARMING, WHICH IS A
SERIOUS ISSUE, AND I CAN'T
BELIEVE YOU DID THAT.
AND I AM NEVER WATCHING YOUR
SHOW AGAIN."
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE DON'T
UNDERSTAND THAT WE'RE NOT
WARRIORS IN THEIR CAUSE.
WE'RE A GROUP OF PEOPLE THAT
REALLY FEEL THAT THEY WANT TO
WRITE JOKES ABOUT THE ABSURDITY
THAT WE SEE IN GOVERNMENT AND
THE WORLD AND ALL THAT, AND
THAT'S IT.
BUSH HAD COME MAINLY TO DISCUSS
THE WAR SPENDING BILL, RECENTLY
PASSED BY THE DEMOCRATIC
CONGRESS, WHICH GIVES THE
PRESIDENT ALL THE FUNDING HE
DESIRES FOR THE TROOP SURGE, BUT
TIES THE FUNDING TO A DEFINITE
DATE FOR WITHDRAWAL OF THE
TROOPS.
AND YOU WON'T BELIEVE WHAT THE
PRESIDENT THINKS OF THAT IDEA.
PUSHING LEGISLATION THAT
WOULD UNDERCUT OUR TROOPS JUST
AS WE'RE BEGINNING TO MAKE
PROGRESS IN BAGHDAD...
OOH.
WE'RE JUST BEGINNING TO MAKE IT.
OH, THEY JUST PULLED THE RUG
TO... D'OH, IT'S JUST HAPPENED
NOW!
YOU KNOW, I SEEM TO REMEMBER,
WE'VE BEEN MAKING PROGRESS FOR
QUITE SOME TIME NOW.
THAT'S PROGRESS.
AND IT'S IMPORTANT PROGRESS, AND
IT'S AN IMPORTANT PART OF OUR
STRATEGY TO WIN IN IRAQ.
IRAQ HAS MADE INCREDIBLE
POLITICAL PROGRESS.
THE IRAQIS ARE MAKING INSPIRING
PROGRESS.
IRAQ IS MAKING INCREDIBLE
POLITICAL PROGRESS.
I BELIEVE WE'RE MAKING REALLY
GOOD PROGRESS IN IRAQ.
WE'RE MAKING PROGRESS.
WE'RE MAKING STEADY PROGRESS.
IT'S SLOWLY BUT SURELY MAKING
PROGRESS.
IN THE BATTLE OF IRAQ, THE
UNITED STATES AND OUR ALLIES
HAVE PREVAILED.
WAIT A MINUTE!
I FIGURED THIS OUT.
I KNOW WHAT'S WRONG WITH WHAT
WE'VE DONE IN IRAQ.
WE'VE BEEN FOLLOWING TIME AS IT
GOES FORWARD.
WHAT A CLASSIC MISTAKE.
LINEAR TIME IS SO 9/11.
--PRE-9/11.
IT'S... IT'S... IT'S KIND OF
ASTONISHING.
THERE IS... I USED TO HAVE A
REAL DISCONNECT, I THINK, WITH
THE ADMINISTRATION.
I COULDN'T FIGURE OUT WHAT WAS
GOING ON.
IT'S SUDDENLY BECOME CLEAR TO
ME.
THEY WOULD RATHER US BELIEVE
THEM TO BE WILDLY INCOMPETENT
AND INARTICULATE THAN TO LET US
KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT HOW THEY
OPERATE.
AND SO THEY DO CONSTITUTIONALLY
MANDATED THINGS MOST OF THE
TIME, BUT THEY DON'T... THEY
FULFILL THE LETTER OF THEIR
OBLIGATION TO CHECKS AND
BALANCES, BUT NOT THE INTENT.
FOR INSTANCE, ALBERTO GONZALES--
AND YOU'VE BEEN WATCHING THE
HEARINGS-- HE IS EITHER A
PERJURER OR A LOW-FUNCTIONING
PINHEAD.
AND HE ALLOWED HIMSELF TO BE
PORTRAYED IN THOSE HEARINGS AS A
LOW-FUNCTIONING PINHEAD RATHER
THAN GIVE THE CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEE CHARGED WITH OVERSIGHT
ANY INFORMATION AS TO HIS
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
AND I USED TO THINK, "THEY'RE
DOING THIS BASED ON A CERTAIN
ARROGANCE."
AND NOW I REALIZE THAT IT'S
BECAUSE THEY BELIEVE THERE IS
ONE ACCOUNTABILITY MOMENT FOR A
PRESIDENT, AND THAT IS THE FOUR-
YEAR ELECTION, AND ONCE YOU GET
THAT ELECTION, YOU'RE DONE.
Moyers: THEY'RE RIGHT, ARE
THEY NOT?
THEY'RE COMPLETELY NOT RIGHT.
THE ELECTION MOMENT IS MERELY
THE AMERICAN PUBLIC SAYING,
"WE'D RATHER YOU BE PRESIDENT
THAN THAT GUY."
THAT'S IT.
THE NEXT FOUR YEARS, THOUGH, YOU
STILL HAVE TO ABIDE BY THE
OVERSIGHT PROCESS THAT IS THERE
TO PREVENT THIS KIND OF BIZARRE
SORT OF CULT-LIKE ATMOSPHERE
THAT FALLS ALONG...
I MEAN, I ACCEPT THAT KIND OF
VEIL OF SECRECY AROUND TOM
CRUISE AND KATIE HOLMES, BUT I
DON'T ACCEPT THAT AROUND OUR
GOVERNMENT.
Moyers: TENS OF THOUSANDS,
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF WORDS
WERE WRITTEN ABOUT GONZALES'
TESTIMONY LAST WEEK IN CONGRESS.
AND I STILL DON'T THINK A LOT OF
PEOPLE GET IT.
AND ALL OF A SUDDEN, THERE ON
THE "DAILY SHOW" THAT EVENING,
YOU DISTILLED THE ESSENCE OF IT.
SO THERE IT WAS TODAY, THE
BIG FIGHT, GONZALEZ V SENATE.
ARE YOU READY TO BUMBLE?!
WHOSE IDEA WAS THIS?
SENATOR, I DON'T RECALL
SPECIFICALLY.
I DON'T RECALL THE-THE CONTENTS.
SENATOR, I HAVE NO RECOLLECTION.
I... I DON'T HAVE ANY
RECOLLECTION.
I HAVE SEARCHED MY MEMORY.
I DON'T RECALL REMEMBERING.
I CAN ONLY TESTIFY AS TO WHAT I
RECALL.
SENATOR, I DON'T RECALL.
I DON'T RECALL.
I FIRMLY BELIEVE THAT NOTHING
IMPROPER OCCURRED.
( LAUGHTER )
AFTER WEEKS OF MOCK
TESTIMONY, THERE YOU HAVE IT:
ALBERTO GONZALES DOES NOT KNOW
WHAT HAPPENED, BUT HE ASSURES
YOU WHAT HE DOESN'T REMEMBER WAS
HANDLED PROPERLY.
AND BY THE WAY, THAT WAS ALL
JUST... THAT WAS A GAME, AND HE
KNEW IT, AND THE GUYS ON THE
COMMITTEE KNEW IT.
AND FOR THE PRESIDENT TO COME
OUT AFTER THAT AND SAY,
"EVERYTHING I SAW THERE GAVE ME
MORE CONFIDENCE IN HIM," THAT
SOLIDIFIED MY NOTION THAT, "OH,
IT'S BECAUSE WHAT HE EXPECTED OF
GONZALEZ WAS... IT'S SORT OF
LIKE, DO YOU REMEMBER IN
"GOODFELLAS" WHEN HENRY HILL GOT
ARRESTED FOR THE FIRST TIME AND
ROBERT DENIRO MET HIM AT THE
COURTHOUSE AND HENRY HILL WAS
REALLY UPSET BECAUSE HE THOUGHT
ROBERT DENIRO WOULD BE REALLY
MAD AT HIM.
AND DENIRO COMES UP TO HIM AND
HE GIVES HIM A $100 AND HE GOES,
"YOU GOT PINCHED.
WE ALL GET PINCHED, BUT YOU DID
IT RIGHT.
YOU DIDN'T SAY NOTHING."
Moyers: GONZALES SAID
NOTHING.
RIGHT.
AND HE WENT UP THERE AND SAID
NOTHING.
YOU GAVE THEM NO LEGAL RECOURSE
AGAINST YOU, AND YOU MADE
YOURSELF, A SMART MAN, A SELF-
MADE MAN, LOOK LIKE AN UTTER
PINHEAD ON NATIONAL TELEVISION,
AND YOU DID IT FOR ME.
Moyers: HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN
THAT THE WASHINGTON PRESS CORPS,
BY AND LARGE, PARTICULARLY THE
SUNDAY SHOWS, JOIN THE GAME WITH
THEM?
I MEAN, YOU WATCH THOSE SHOWS...
THEY DON'T ALL, I MEAN...
Moyers: NO, NOT ALL OF THEM
DO, BUT THERE'S A KIND OF WINK-
WINK QUESTIONING GOING ON THERE.
YOU KNOW, I'LL ASK THE DEVIL'S
ADVOCATE.
IT'S THE HARLEM "GLOBE"
TROTTERS PLAYING THE
WASHINGTON GENERALS.
THEY'RE THE ONLY TEAM PLAYING
AND THEY HAVE TO PLAY EACH
OTHER EVERY WEEK.
AND THEY ALL SORT OF ASSUMED
THEIR ROLE.
AT THIS POINT, THE GOVERNMENT
IS JUST, YOU KNOW, BLOWING THE
DOORS OFF THE MEDIA, AND NOT
EVERYWHERE.
AND I THINK THIS IS WHERE, YOU
KNOW, A LOT OF THOSE BLOG
REPORTERS AND ALL THOSE THINGS
ARE BRINGING A LOT OF URGENCY
AND A LOT MOMENTUM TO STORIES
THAT WOULDN'T NORMALLY CARRY
ANY MOMENTUM.
Moyers: YOU KNOW, WE
WATCHED THE McCAIN INTERVIEW
YOU DID THIS WEEK.
UH-HUH.
Moyers: SOMETHING WAS GOING
ON IN THAT INTERVIEW THAT I
HAVE NOT SEEN IN ANY OTHER
INTERVIEW YOU'VE DONE WITH A
POLITICAL FIGURE.
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN YOUR
HEAD?
IN MY HEAD?
Moyers: YEAH.
UH, ARE HIS ARMS LONG
ENOUGH TO CONNECT WITH ME IF
HE COMES ACROSS THE TABLE.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, OR AT LEAST
THE ONES THAT ARE ON THE SUBWAY
WITH... THEY KNOW THERE'S A REAL
THREAT OUT THERE.
THEY FELT LIKE IRAQ LESSENED OUR
ABILITY TO FIGHT THAT THREAT.
SO WHEN THEY SAY THAT... THAT'S
WHEN I... WHEN THEY SAY THE
TALKING POINT IS "THEY'LL FOLLOW
US HOME," THEY'RE TRYING TO
FOLLOW US HOME ANYWAY, WHETHER
WE'RE IN IRAQ OR NOT.
I KNOW THAT.
LOOK, BILL RUSSELL, A FAMOUS
PHILOSOPHER OF THE BOSTON
CELTICS, ONCE "WHEN THINGS GO
BAD, THINGS GO BAD."
THE WAR WAS TERRIBLY MISMANAGED.
IT WAS TERRIBLY MISMANAGED.
BUT THEN WHY NOT BE HONEST
ABOUT THAT?
WHY ATTACK THE PEOPLE WHO...?
WE ARE WHERE WE ARE NOW.
THEN THE QUESTION IS: CAN WE
GIVE THIS STRATEGY A CHANCE?
AND I'M EMPHASIZING A CHANCE TO
SUCCEED WITH A GREAT GENERAL,
AND I THINK...
WHY SHOULD WE?
WHY?
BECAUSE THE...
IF THE ARCHITECTS THAT BUILT
THE HOUSE WITHOUT ANY DOORS OR
WINDOWS DON'T ADMIT THAT THAT'S
THE HOUSE THEY BUILT AND
CONTINUE TO SAY "NO, IT'S YOUR
FAULT FOR NOT BEING ABLE TO SEE
INTO IT," THEN I DON'T
UNDERSTAND HOW WE'RE SUPPOSED TO
MOVE FORWARD.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
I DON'T PARTICULARLY ENJOY
THOSE TYPES OF INTERVIEWS,
BECAUSE I HAVE A GREAT RESPECT
FOR SENATOR McCAIN, AND I HATE
THE IDEA THAT OUR CONVERSATION
BECAME JUST TWO PEOPLE SORT OF
TALKING OVER EACH OTHER AT ONE
POINT.
BUT I ALSO IN MY HEAD THOUGHT,
"I WOULD LOVE TO DO AN INTERVIEW
WHERE IT'S JUST SORT OF
DECONSTRUCTED THE TALKING POINTS
OF IRAQ, THE IDEA OF IS THIS
REALLY THE CONVERSATION WE'RE
HAVING ABOUT THIS WAR, THAT IF
WE DON'T DEFEAT AL QAEDA IN
IRAQ, THEY'LL FOLLOW US HOME?
THAT TO SUPPORT THE TROOPS MEANS
NOT TO QUESTION THAT THE SURGE
COULD WORK?
THAT WHAT WE'RE REALLY SEEING IN
IRAQ IS NOT A TERRIBLE WAR, BUT,
IN FACT, JUST THE MEDIA'S
PORTRAYAL OF IT?"
SO I WANTED TO JUST GO THROUGH
LIKE, IS THIS REALLY THE
CONVERSATION THAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE HAVING ABOUT SOMETHING AS
SIGNIFICANT AS THIS WAR?
THEY SAY THAT IF WE PUT A
TIMETABLE OR CRITICIZING THE
PRESIDENT IS NOT SUPPORTING THE
TROOPS.
EXPLAIN TO ME WHY THAT IS
SUPPORTING THE TROOPS LESS THAN
EXTENDING THEIR TOURS OF DUTY
FROM 12 MONTHS TO 15 MONTHS,
PUTTING THEM AT STOP-LOSS, AND
NOT HAVING WALTER REED BE UP TO
SNUFF.
HOW IS IT... HOW CAN THE
PRESIDENT JUSTIFY THAT?
HOW CAN HE HAVE THE BALLS TO
JUSTIFY THAT?
ALL I CAN SAY IS THAT IF YOU
TALK TO THESE YOUNG MEN AND
WOMEN WHO ARE FIGHTING, THEY'LL
TELL YOU THEY THINK IT'S A
WORTHWHILE CAUSE, AND THEY'RE
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM, AND
THEY...
WELL, THEY ALL... I'M SAYING THE
OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF THEM
DO.
I HEAR FROM THEM ALL THE TIME.
THE MAJORITY OF THE GUYS THAT
I TALK TO SAY, "THE POLITICAL
SCENE IS NOT MY SCENE; I'M A
SOLDIER."
I TALK TO THEM ALL THE TIME,
MY FRIEND, AND I HEAR FROM THEM
ALL THE TIME.
THEY KNOW.
I KNOW WHAT WAR'S LIKE.
I KNOW WHAT THE SCENE'S LIKE.
AND I'M TELLING YOU THAT THEY
BELIEVE THAT THEY'RE FIGHTING
FOR SOMEBODY ELSE'S FREEDOM.
AND THE MAJORITY OF THEM BELIEVE
THAT.
NOW, YOU'RE ENTITLED TO YOUR
VIEWS.
BUT THE VIEW OF THE MAJORITY OF
THEM IS THAT FEEL THEY'RE DOING
THE RIGHT THING, AND THEIR
PARENTS, WHO HAVE ALSO MADE
SACRIFICES, GENERALLY SPEAKING,
AND THEY'RE PROUD OF THE
SERVICE OF THEIR SONS AND
DAUGHTERS.
NO ONE'S SAYING THAT THEY
SHOULDN'T BE PROUD OF THEIR
SERVICE.
AND I'M PROUD OF THEM TOO.
THIS IS A VERY UNFAIR WAY TO
DEAL WITH THIS ISSUE.
IT CERTAINLY IS.
WHAT'S LESS SUPPORTIVE OF
THEM IS... SETTLE DOWN FOR A
SECOND.
NO, YOU SETTLE DOWN.
THAT THEY'RE FIGHTING IN A WAR
THAT THEY LOST.
THAT'S NOT FAIR TO THEM.
WHAT I BELIEVE IS LESS
SUPPORTIVE TO THE GOOD PEOPLE
WHO BELIEVE THEY'RE FIGHTING A
GREAT CAUSE IS TO NOT GIVE THEM
A STRATEGY THAT MAKES THEIR
SUCCESS POSSIBLE...
WE NOW HAVE A STRATEGY.
AND TO NOT... ADDING 10,000
PEOPLE TO BAGHDAD?
ADD 350,000.
THEN WE MIGHT HAVE A SHOT.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT
STRATEGY WILL SUCCEED, BUT WE DO
HAVE A NEW STRATEGY.
THAT'S A FACT.
ALL I'M SAYING IS YOU CANNOT
LOOK A SOLDIER IN THE EYE AND
SAY, "QUESTIONING THE PRESIDENT
IS LESS SUPPORTIVE TO YOU THAN
EXTENDING YOUR TOUR THREE
MONTHS.
YOU SHOULD BE COMING HOME TO
YOUR FAMILY."
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
Moyers: I SAW McCAIN SHRIVEL.
I MEAN, HE'S BEEN ON YOUR SHOW
LIKE HE DIDN'T BELIEVE ME.  I
THINK ANYBODY WHO'S BEEN IN A
P.O.W. CAMP FOR FIVE YEARS CAN
TAKE EIGHT MINUTES ON THE "DAILY
SHOW."
Moyers: BUT SOMETHING
HAPPENED.
YOU SAW IT HAPPEN TO HIM.
WHAT YOU SAW WAS EVASIVE
ACTION.
IT WASN'T SHRIVELING, IT WAS
MERELY...
Moyers: BUT HE DROPPED HIS
HEAD, AND YOU COULD... YOU
COULD ACTUALLY SEE...
HE STOPPED CONNECTING AND
JUST LOOKED AT MY CHEST AND
DECIDED, "I'M JUST GOING TO
CONTINUE TO TALK ABOUT HONOR AND
DUTY AND THE FAMILIES SHOULD BE
PROUD," AND ALL THE THINGS THAT
ARE CUDGELS EMOTIONALLY TO KEEP
US FROM THE CONVERSATION, BUT
THINGS THAT WEREN'T RELEVANT TO
WHAT WE WERE TALKING ABOUT.
Moyers: SO MANY PEOPLE SEEM
TO WANT JUST WHAT YOU DID,
SOMEBODY TO CUT THROUGH THE
TALKING POINTS AND GET OUR
POLITICIANS TO TALK CANDIDLY AND
FRANKLY.
AND I KNOW YOU...
NOT THAT MANY PEOPLE.
SOME PEOPLE WANT IT.
A COUPLE OF PEOPLE DOWNLOAD IT
FROM iTUNES.
Moyers: BUT IT WAS THIS TIME,
THIS MOMENT THIS WEEK THAT YOU
DECIDED THAT, WHAT IT...
THAT'S RIGHT.
Moyers: COMING BACK TO HIM.
WELL, IT'S ALSO AT THE FORE
NOW BECAUSE THE SENATE AND THE
HOUSE ARE WORKING ON
TIMETABLES-- WHICH, BY THE WAY,
WHO KNOWS IF THAT'S AN ISSUE
EITHER?
IT'S... BUT IT'S, AGAIN, THE
CONVERSATION THAT THE SENATE AND
THE HOUSE ARE HAVING WITH THE
PRESIDENT WAS VERY SIMILAR TO
THE CONVERSATION THAT McCAIN AND
I WERE HAVING, WHICH WAS TWO
PEOPLE TALKING OVER EACH OTHER
AND NOBODY REALLY ADDRESSING THE
UNDERLYING ISSUES OF WHAT KIND
OF COUNTRY DO WE WANT TO BE
MOVING FORWARD IN THIS?
AND IT'S NOT ABOUT BEING A
PACIFIST OR SUGGESTING THAT YOU
CAN NEVER HAVE A MILITARY
SOLUTION TO THINGS; IT'S JUST
THAT IT APPEARS THAT THIS IS NOT
THE SMART WAY TO FIGHT THIS
THREAT.
Moyers: YOUR PERSISTENCE AND
HIS INABILITY TO ANSWER WITHOUT
THE TALKING POINTS DID GET TO
THE TRUTH: THAT THERE'S A
CONTRADICTION TO WHAT'S GOING ON
IN VIETNAM... THERE'S A
CONTRADICTION...
YEAH, EXACTLY, THERE'S A
CONTRADICTION TO WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THAT WAR THAT THEY CAN'T TALK
ABOUT.
THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE IS AN ENORMOUS
CONTRADICTION, AND IT IS READILY
APPARENT IF YOU JUST WALK
THROUGH SIMPLE SORT OF LOGIC AND
SIMPLE RATIONAL POINTS.
BUT THE THING THAT THEY DON'T
REALIZE IS THAT EVERYONE WANTS
THEM TO COME FROM BEYOND THAT
CONTRADICTION SO THAT WE CAN ALL
FIX IT.
NOBODY IS SAYING, "WE DON'T HAVE
A PROBLEM."
NOBODY IS SAYING THAT "9/11
DIDN'T HAPPEN."
WHAT THEY'RE SAYING IS, "WE'RE
NOT A FRAGILE COUNTRY.
TRUST US TO HAVE THIS
CONVERSATION SO THAT WE CAN DO
THIS IN THE RIGHT WAY, IN A MORE
EFFECTIVE WAY."
Moyers: WHY AREN'T WE HAVING
THAT CONVERSATION?
WELL, THAT'S A VERY GOOD
POINT.
WHY IS THE COUNTRY NOT HAVING
THIS CONVERSATION, THE KIND OF
CONVERSATION THAT REQUIRES THE
POLITICIANS WHO ARE RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE WAR TO BE SPECIFIC TO
THE CONCERNS OF THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE?
I MEAN, THEY DO COME OUT AND A
KIND OF GAUZE GOES UP.
BECAUSE I DON'T... I DON'T
THINK POLITICS IS ANY LONGER
ABOUT A CONVERSATION WITH THE
COUNTRY.
IT'S ABOUT FIGURING OUT HOW TO
GET TO DO WHAT YOU WANT, THE
BEST WAY TO SELL THE PRODUCT
THAT YOU WANT TO PUT OUT THERE,
BUT NOT NECESSARILY FOR THE
PRODUCTS ON... YOU KNOW, IT'S
SORT OF LIKE WHEN A DISHWASHING
SOAP, YOU KNOW, THEY WANT TO
MAKE A BIG SPLASH, SO THEY
DECIDE TO HAVE MORE LEMON, AS
THOUGH PEOPLE ARE GOING TO BE
LIKE, "THAT HAS BEEN THE PROBLEM
WITH MY DISHES!
NOT ENOUGH LEMON SCENT!"
Moyers: WELL, WHAT'S YOUR
THINKING ABOUT WHY IT IS AS THE
WAR ENTERS ITS FIFTH YEAR, AND
THE PRESIDENT HAS ANNOUNCED AN
EXTENSION OF TOURS TO 15 MONTHS,
AND THEY'RE GOING TO CALL UP THE
NATIONAL GUARD, AND APRIL WAS
THE BLOODIEST MONTH SO FAR SINCE
THE WAR STARTED, AND THERE WAS
ONE DAY IN APRIL THAT WAS THE
BLOODIEST DAY, THAT PEOPLE HAVE
SEEN THEY HAVE NO WAY TO GET THE
GUYS IN WASHINGTON AND
CONDOLEEZZA RICE TO LISTEN TO
THEM, THAT THERE SEEMS A
DETACHMENT EMOTIONALLY AND
POLITICALLY IN THIS COUNTRY FROM
WHAT IS HAPPENING.
IT'S VERY HARD TO FEEL THE
DIFFICULTIES THAT THE MILITARY
GOES THROUGH.
IT'S VERY HARD TO FEEL THE
DIFFICULTIES OF MILITARY
FAMILIES UNLESS YOU'RE IN THAT
ENVIRONMENT.
AND SOMETIMES YOU HAVE TO FORCE
YOURSELF TO TRY AND PUT YOURSELF
IN OTHER PEOPLE'S SORT OF SHOES
AND ENVIRONMENT TO GET THE SENSE
OF THAT.
YOU KNOW, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I DO THINK GOVERNMENT COUNTS ON
IS THAT PEOPLE ARE BUSY.
AND IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO
MOBILIZE A BUSY AND RELATIVELY
AFFLUENT COUNTRY, UNLESS IT'S
OVER REALLY CRUCIAL, YOU KNOW,
FOUNDATIONAL ISSUES THAT WE COME
TO SORT OF A TIPPING POINT.
Moyers: WAR?
BUT WAR THAT HASN'T AFFECTED
US HERE IN THE WAY THAT YOU
WOULD IMAGINE A FIVE-YEAR WAR
WOULD AFFECT A COUNTRY.
I THINK THAT'S WHY THEY'RE SO...
REALLY HERE'S THE DISCONNECT.
IT'S SORT OF THIS ODD-- AND I'VE
ALWAYS HAD THIS PROBLEM WITH THE
RATIONALITY OF IT-- THAT THE
PRESIDENT SAYS, "WE ARE IN THE
FIGHT FOR A WAY OF LIFE.
THIS IS THE GREATEST BATTLE OF
OUR GENERATION AND OF THE
GENERATIONS TO COME, AND, SO
WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS, YOU
KNOW, IRAQ HAS TO BE WON OR OUR
WAY OF LIFE ENDS AND OUR
CHILDREN AND OUR CHILDREN'S
CHILDREN ALL SUFFER.
SO WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS SEND
10,000 MORE TROOPS TO BAGHDAD."
SO THERE'S A DISCONNECT THERE
BETWEEN YOU'RE TELLING ME THIS
IS THE FIGHT OF OUR GENERATION,
AND YOU'RE GOING TO INCREASE
TROOP STRENGTH BY 10% AND THAT'S
GOING TO DO IT.
I'M SURE WHAT HE WOULD LIKE TO
DO IS SEND 400,000 MORE TROOPS
THERE, BUT HE CAN'T BECAUSE HE
DOESN'T HAVE THEM.
AND THE WAY TO GET THAT WOULD BE
TO INSTITUTE A DRAFT, AND THE
MINUTE YOU DO THAT SUDDENLY THE
COUNTRY'S NOT SO DAMN BUSY
ANYMORE AND THEN THEY REALLY
FIGHT BACK, AND THEN THE WHOLE
THING FALLS APART.
SO THEY HAVE A REALLY DELICATE
BALANCE TO WALK BETWEEN KEEPING
US RELATIVELY FEARFUL, BUT NOT
SO FEARFUL THAT WE STOP WHAT
WE'RE DOING AND REALLY EXAMINE
HOW IT IS THAT THEY'VE BEEN
WAGING THIS.
Moyers: BUT I STILL NEED TO
KNOW WHY McCCAIN, THIS WEEK,
WHY... YOU'RE EXACTLY RIGHT,
BUT WHY IS HE THE PERSON FROM
WHO...
OH, HE'S THE ONLY PERSON I
CAN GET A HOLD OF.
YOU MEAN, IS THAT WHY DID I?
Moyers: YEAH, YEAH.
OH, YEAH.
NO ONE ELSE WILL TALK TO ME.
Moyers: BUT YOU WERE THINKING
OF THESE BEFORE YOU GOT McCAIN.
I MEAN, YOU'VE BEEN...
SURE, YES, THIS HAPPENED WITH
McCAIN BECAUSE HE WAS
UNFORTUNATE ENOUGH TO WALK INTO
THE STUDIO, YOU KNOW.
IT'S... THE FRUSTRATION OF OUR
SHOW IS VERY MUCH OUTSIDE ANY
PARAMETERS OF THE MEDIA OR THE
GOVERNMENT.
WE DON'T HAVE ACCESS TO THESE
PEOPLE.
WE DON'T HAVE ACCESS.
WE DON'T GO TO DINNERS.
WE DON'T HAVE COCKTAIL PARTIES.
WE DON'T, YOU KNOW... YOU'VE
SEEN WHAT HAPPENS WHEN ONE OF US
ENDS UP AT THE WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENTS' DINNER.
IT DOESN'T END WELL, YOU KNOW.
SO HE WAS THE UNLUCKY RECIPIENT
OF PENT-UP FRUSTRATION.
Moyers: YOU KNOW, THE MEDIA'S
BEEN PLAYING THIS BIG-- CNN,
"U.S.A. TODAY."
WELL, THEY'VE GOT 24 HOURS TO
FILL.
YOU KNOW, HOW MANY TIMES CAN
ANNA NICOLE SMITH'S BABY GET A
NEW FATHER?
Moyers: BUT WHAT DOES IT SAY
ABOUT THE PRESS THAT THAT
INTERVIEW YOU DID BECAME NEWS
AND, IN A WAY, REFLECTED ON THE
FAILURE OF THE "PROFESSIONAL"
JOURNALIST TO ASK THOSE KIND OF
QUESTIONS?
I THINK, FIRST OF ALL, FOR
SOME REASON, EVERYTHING THAT WE
DO OR STEPHEN DOES-- STEPHEN
COLBERT-- IS ALSO THEN TURNED
INTO NEWS.
I THINK IT'S JUST ABOUT THE
MACHINE IS ABOUT REPORTING THE
NEWS AND THEN REPORTING THE NEWS
ABOUT THE NEWS AND THEN HAVING
THOSE MOMENTS WHERE THEY SIT
AROUND AND GO, "ARE WE REPORTING
THE NEWS CORRECTLY?"
I THINK WE ARE, AND THEN THEY GO
BACK TO THE... AND THE CYCLE
JUST SORT OF CONTINUES.
I DON'T KNOW THAT IF THERE WAS
ANYTHING PARTICULARLY
ASTONISHING ABOUT THE
CONVERSATION IN THAT REGARD.
YOU KNOW, IT WAS DID YOU SEE THE
INTERVIEW THAT WOLF BLITZER DID
WITH DICK CHENEY A WHILE BACK?
Moyers: YES, WE HAVE THAT.
LET'S PLAY IT.
KUMBAYAH, MY LORD...
KUMBAYAH...
KUMBAYAR ARE.
PERHAPS THIS SIGNALS A NEW
ERA OF OPENNESS, GLASNOST, IF
YOU WILL, WITH THIS
ADMINISTRATION AND THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
IS BIN LADEN STILL ALIVE?
WHAT IF THE SENATE PASSES A
RESOLUTION PASSES SAYING IT'S
NOT A GOOD IDEA?
HAVE YOU CONTRIBUTED TO HIS
LEGAL DEFENSE FUND?
DO YOU TRUST NOURI AL-MALIKI?
DO YOU WANT HIM TO ARREST
MUQTADA AL-SADR?
OOOH.
BLITZER!
FINALLY EARNING THAT WHITE
BEARD.
SOLID QUESTIONS, WOLF.
MR. VICE PRESIDENT?
I'M NOT GOING TO DISCUSS IT.
YOU CAN ASK THAT QUESTION ALL
DAY LONG.
YOU'VE GOT MY ANSWER.
I DON'T WANT TO BE THAT PRECISE.
NOW, NO ADMINISTRATION IN THEIR
RIGHT MIND IS GOING TO ANSWER
THE QUESTION YOU JUST ASKED.
WE KNOW NO ADMINISTRATION IN
THEIR RIGHT MIND WOULD ANSWER
IT.
WE'RE ASKING YOU!
Moyers: HAVE YOU LOST YOUR
INNOCENCE?
WHAT?
WELL, IT WAS IN 1981.
IT WAS AT A FRAT PARTY.
OH, I'M SORRY.
YOU KNOW, I THINK THIS IS GOING
TO SOUND INCREDIBLY PAT, BUT I
THINK YOU LOSE YOUR INNOCENCE
WHEN YOU HAVE KIDS, BECAUSE THE
WORLD SUDDENLY BECOMES A MUCH
MORE DANGEROUS PLACE.
AND YOU BECOME MUCH MORE...
YOU... THERE ARE TWO THINGS THAT
HAPPEN.
YOU RECOGNIZE HOW FRAGILE
INDIVIDUALS ARE, AND YOU
RECOGNIZE THE STRENGTH OF THE
GENERAL OVERALL GROUP, BUT YOU
DON'T CARE ANYMORE.
YOU'RE JUST FIGHTING FOR THE ONE
THING, SEE, AND THEN YOU ALSO
RECOGNIZE THAT EVERYBODY THEN IS
ALSO SOMEBODY'S CHILD.
IT'S... I'M... YEAH, I MEAN,
IT'S TUMULTUOUS.
Moyers: SO YOUR CHILDREN ARE
HOW OLD?
TWO AND A HALF AND 14 MONTHS.
Moyers: SO HAS IT BEEN WITHIN
THAT PERIOD OF TIME THAT YOU
MADE THIS-- YOU WOULDN'T
RECOGNIZE IT, BUT WE RECOGNIZE
IT-- TRANSFORMATION FROM THE
STANDUP COMIC TO A SERIOUS
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CRITIC?
I DON'T CONSIDER MYSELF A
SERIOUS AND SOCIAL POLITICAL
CRITIC.
Moyers: BUT I DO.
AND I'M YOUR AUDIENCE.
YES, AND I END UP WITH ONE OF
YOUR TOTE BAGS.
BUT THE IMPORTANT THING IS THAT
I GUESS I DON'T SPEND ANY TIME
THINKING ABOUT WHAT I AM OR WHAT
WE DO MEANS.
I SPEND MY TIME DOING IT.
AND I THINK THAT'S... I'M NOT
TRYING TO BE MODEST OF SELF-
DEPRECATING OR IN ANY WAY TRYING
TO DO THAT.
I'M JUST TRYING TO TELL YOU, I
FOCUS ON THE TASK AND TRY AND DO
IT AS BEST WE CAN.
AND WE'RE CONSTANTLY EVOLVING
IT, BECAUSE IT'S MY WAY OF
TRYING TO MAKE SENSE OF ALL
THESE AMBIVALENT FEELINGS I
HAVE.
Moyers: I WATCHED THE
INTERVIEW YOU DID THE OTHER
NIGHT WITH THE FORMER IRAQI
OFFICIAL ALI ALLAWEH.
AND I WAS STRUCK THAT YOU WERE
DOING THIS SOON AFTER THE
MASSACRE AT VIRGINIA TECH.
IT WASN'T YOUR USUALLY "DAILY
SHOW" BANTER.
ON A MORE PERSONAL NOTE-- I
DON'T EVEN KNOW IF IT'S
APPROPRIATE TO BROACH IT-- BUT
WE IN THIS COUNTRY WE JUST HAD A
VERY TRAGIC SITUATION OCCUR AT
ONE OF OUR UNIVERSITIES, AND IT
REALLY HAS TAKEN THE COUNTRY
ABACK, AND THERE'S A REAL
GRIEVING PROCESS THAT WE'RE
GOING THROUGH, AND GOING THROUGH
IT MOURNING BY LEARNING ABOUT
THE VICTIMS AND LEARNING ABOUT
IT AND SHOWING OUR SUPPORT, YOU
KNOW, I HESITATE TO SAY...
HOW DOES YOUR COUNTRY HANDLE
WHAT IS THAT TYPE OF CARNAGE ON
A DAILY BASIS?
IS THERE A WAY TO GRIEVE?
IS THERE A NUMBNESS THAT SETS
IN?
HOW IS THAT?
WELL, I THINK THE SCALE OF
VIOLENCE IN IRAQ IS REALLY
INCONCEIVABLE IN YOUR TERMS.
RIGHT.
WE HAVE, ON A DAILY BASIS,
WHAT YOU HAD THE OTHER DAY IN
VIRGINIA TECH.
I MEAN, MASSACRES OF THAT SCALE
PRACTICALLY ON A DAILY BASIS AND
IT'S VERY HARD TO GRIEVE.
MOST OF THE... MOST OF THE WAY
THAT PEOPLE DO TREAT THIS IS
JUST TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY.
WE NOW HAVE A VERY LARGE
EXTERNAL REFUGEE PROBLEM.
NEARLY TWO MILLION IRAQIS HAVE
LEFT THE COUNTRY AND INTERNAL
REFUGEE PROBLEM ALSO, TOO MANY
PEOPLE DISPLACED.
BUT THE SCALE OF VIOLENCE AND
ITS CONTINUITY IS SUCH THAT IT
REALLY NUMBS YOU.
AND IN MY CASE, FOR EXAMPLE, I
HAD SIX PEOPLE WHOM I HAD
APPOINTED AT VARIOUS POSITIONS
IN THE GOVERNMENT KILLED,
INCLUDING MY OFFICE MANAGER.
WE HAD THIS SUICIDE BOMBER WALK
INTO MY CONTINGENT OF GOD.
SO IT'S QUITE A... QUITE A
SERIOUS PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEM
THAT'S GOING TO BE ONE OF THE
LEGACIES OF THIS TERRIBLE
CRISIS.
YES, AND I... TRULY I CANNOT
FATHOM IT AND I JUST RECALL, YOU
KNOW, THERE'S BEEN SO MUCH
INFORMATION, AND I WAS BECOMING
WRAPPED UP IN OUR GRIEF, AND
THEN I SAW THE HEADLINE TODAY OF
LITERALLY 150,000 PEOPLE KILLED,
--150 PEOPLE KILLED, AND IT JUST
SENDS AN AWFUL DAGGER TO YOUR
HEART, LIKE I CAN'T IMAGINE HOW
THEY DEAL WITH IT.
Moyers: I MEAN, I SAID,
"SOMETHING'S GOING ON WITH
STEWART THERE."
WHAT WAS IT?
WELL, FIRST OF ALL, THERE'S
YOU KNOW, THE PROCESS THAT WE
PUT THE SHOW TOGETHER IS ALWAYS
GOING TO BE AFFECTED BY THE, YOU
KNOW, THE CLIMATE THAT WE LIVE
IN.
AND THERE WAS A PALL CAST OVER
THE COUNTRY.
BUT ALSO, YOU KNOW, YOU'RE
FIGHTING YOUR OWN SADNESS DURING
THE DAY HAVING NOTHING TO DO
WITH THAT.
WE FELT... WE FEEL NO OBLIGATION
TO FOLLOW THE NEWS CYCLE.
IN OTHER WORDS, I FELT NO
OBLIGATION TO COVER THIS STORY
IN ANY WAY BECAUSE WE'RE NOT...
LIKE I SAID, WE'RE NOT
JOURNALIST.
AND AT THAT POINT, THERE'S
NOTHING SORT OF FUNNY OR ABSURD
OR... TO SAY ABOUT IT.
BUT THERE IS A SADNESS THAT YOU
CAN'T ESCAPE JUST WITHIN
YOURSELF.
AND I'M ALSO INTERVIEWING A GUY
WHO'S JUST WRITTEN A BOOK ABOUT
HIS EXPERIENCE LIVING IN IRAQ
FACED WITH THE TYPE OF VIOLENCE
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT ON A,
YOU KNOW, AS HE SAID, AN
UNIMAGINABLE SCALE.
AND I THINK THAT THE COMBINATION
OF THAT IS VERY HARD TO SHAKE.
AND I KNOW THAT MY JOB IS TO
SHAKE IT AND TO PERFORM.
THAT'S WHY IT'S PERFORMING AND
NOT... YOU KNOW, IT WOULDN'T BE
A VERY INTERESTING SHOW IF I
JUST CAME OUT ONE DAY AND SAID,
"I'M GOING TO SIT HERE IN A BALL
AND ROCK BACK AND FORTH AND WILL
YOU JOIN ME FOR A HALF HOUR OF
SADNESS?"
YOU KNOW, THEY... I HAVE TO... I
HAVE TO...
Moyers: PEOPLE MORE.
PEOPLE COME TO EXPECT BY THAT
WASN'T PERFORMANCE, WHEN YOU
WERE WRESTLING WITH THE SADNESS
YOU WERE FEELING WITH HIM...
WITH HIM.
WELL, IT... I THOUGHT IT WAS
RELEVANT TO THE CONVERSATION I
WAS HAVING WITH HIM, WHICH WAS
THE REASON THAT IT SORT OF
OCCURRED TO ME WAS, YOU KNOW, I
WAS... I WAS OBVIOUSLY FOLLOWING
THE INTERNET HEADLINES ALL DAY.
AND THERE WAS, YOU KNOW, THIS
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF SPACE AND
COVERAGE TO VIRGINIA TECH, AS
THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN.
AND I HAPPENED TO CATCH SORT OF
A HEADLINE LOWER DOWN, WHICH WAS
200 PEOPLE KILLED IN FOUR BOMB
ATTACKS IN IRAQ.
AND I THINK... MY FOCUS ON WHAT
WAS HAPPENING HERE VERSUS SORT
OF THIS PERIPHERAL VISION THING
THAT CAUGHT MY EYE ABOUT, "OH,
RIGHT, THERE ARE LIVES..." I
THINK IT WAS A MOMENT OF... I
FELT GUILTY.
Moyers: GUILTY?
FOR NOT HAVING THE EMPATHY
FOR THEIR SUFFERING ON A DAILY
BASIS THAT I FEEL SOMETHING THAT
I SHOULD.
--SOMETIMES THAT I SHOULD.
Moyers: DO YOU EVER THINK
THAT PERHAPS WHAT I DO IN
REPORTING DOCUMENTARIES ABOUT
REALITY AND WHAT YOU DO IN
POKING SOME FUN AND PUTTING SOME
HUMOR AROUND THE HORRORS OF THE
WORLD, FEED INTO THE SENSE OF
HELPLESSNESS THAT PEOPLE...?
NO.
I MEAN, AGAIN, I DON'T KNOW,
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW HOW PEOPLE
FEEL.
AND, YOU KNOW, THAT'S THE BEAUTY
OF TV, IS THEY CAN SEE US, BUT
WE CAN'T SEE THEM.
I THINK THAT IF WE DO ANYTHING
IN A POSITIVE SENSE FOR THE
WORLD IS PROVIDE ONE LITTLE BIT
OF CONTEXT THAT'S VERY
SPECIFICALLY FOCUSED, AND
HOPEFULLY PEOPLE CAN ADD TO
THEIR ENTIRE PUZZLE THAT GIVES
THEM A LARGER PICTURE OF WHAT IT
IS THAT THEY SEE.
BUT I DON'T THINK IF ANYTHING, I
DON'T THINK IT'S A FEELING OF
HOPELESSNESS THAT PEOPLE FEEL.
I THINK IF THEY FEEL... IF
THEY'RE FEELING WHAT WE'RE
FEELING, IT'S THAT THIS IS HOW
WE FIGHT BACK.
I CAN ONLY FIGHT BACK IN A WAY
THAT I FEEL LIKE I'M TALENTED.
AND I FEEL LIKE THE ONLY THING
THAT I CAN DO-- AND I'VE BEEN
FIRED FROM ENOUGH JOBS THAT I'M
PRETTY CONFIDENT IN SAYING
THIS-- THE ONLY THING THAT I CAN
DO EVEN A LITTLE BIT BETTER THAN
MOST PEOPLE IS CREATE THAT SORT
OF... THAT CONTEXT WITH HUMOR.
AND THAT'S MY WAY OF NOT BEING
HELPLESS AND NOT BEING HOPELESS.
Moyers: IS WASHINGTON A
BETTER SOURCE FOR JOKES NOW THAT
THE DEMOCRATS ARE IN THE
MAJORITY?
IT'S MORE FUN FOR US BECAUSE
WE'RE TIRED OF THE SAME
DECONSTRUCTED GAME.
Moyers: YEAH, I SAW THAT
PIECE YOU DID THE OTHER DAY ON
THE DEMOCRATS DEBATING HOW TO
LOSE THE WAR.
RIGHT, EXACTLY.
THIS HAS BEEN SIX YEARS, YOU
KNOW.
WE'RE WORN DOWN.
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO A NEW GAME
TO PLAY AND SOMETHING NEW.
I MEAN, THE ONLY JOY I'VE HAD IN
THAT TIME IS HAVING STEPHEN'S
SHOW COME ON THE AIR AND SORT OF
GIVE US A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE.
AND, YOU KNOW, BECAUSE IT'S MADE
OF KIND OF THE SAME GENETIC
MATERIAL AS OUR SHOW, IT FEELS
LIKE IT'S ALSO FRESHENED UP OUR
PERSPECTIVE AND KIND OF
COMPLETED OUR THOUGHT, BUT...
Moyers: WELL, YOU COULD TAKE
ME ON AS A CORRESPONDENT.
WE WOULD LOVE TO TAKE YOU ON
AS A CORRESPONDENT.
Moyers: WELL, WHO WOULD
YOU...
YOU KNOW, THE PAY IS PRETTY
BAD.
Moyers: YEAH, WELL, THIS IS
PBS.
WELL, WHAT WOULD MY ASSIGNMENT
BE?
WHERE WOULD YOU WANT ME TO BE,
YOUR SENIOR ELDERLY
CORRESPONDENT?
OR YOUR SENIOR...
I WOULD LIKE YOU TO JUST SIT
IN MY OFFICE, AND WHEN I WALK
IN, JUST LOWER YOUR HEAD AND GO,
"THAT WAS UGLY."
Moyers: I DO THAT WHEN I'M
WATCHING.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
APPRECIATE IT.
Moyers: FOR SIX YEARS THE
DEMOCRATS IN CONGRESS HAVE
SUFFERED FROM WHAT JON STEWART
MIGHT CALL SUBPOENA ENVY.
AS THE MINORITY THEY DIDN'T HAVE
THE POWER TO ORDER ANYONE TO
TESTIFY BEFORE THEIR HEARINGS.
BUT THAT'S CHANGED.
DEMOCRATS ARE NOW IN THE
MAJORITY, AND THEY'RE ISSUING
SUBPOENAS AS FAST AND FURIOUS AS
ZEUS HURLED THUNDERBOLTS FROM
MOUNT OLYMPUS.
THAT'S A GOOD THING IF YOU THINK
THE PARTIES SHOULD INVESTIGATE
AND HOLD EACH OTHER ACCOUNTABLE.
THIS WEEK CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEES VOTED TO SUBPOENA
SECRETARY OF STATE CONDOLEEZZA
RICE, KARL ROVE'S DEPUTY AT THE
WHITE HOUSE, THE REPUBLICAN
NATIONAL COMMITTEE, AND A FORMER
TOP ASSISTANT TO THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, ALBERTO GONZALEZ.
THE FLOODGATES ARE OPENING INTO
WHETHER THE FIRING OF CERTAIN
FEDERAL ATTORNEYS, PROSECUTORS,
WAS MEANT TO INFLUENCE
INVESTIGATIONS INTO CORRUPTION.
WE LEARN SOMETHING ABOUT THAT
STORY FROM AN ONLINE JOURNALIST
WHOSE REPORTERS INCLUDE PEOPLE
LIKE YOU.
WE MAY BE LOOKING AT THE NEW
FACE OF JOURNALISM.
STAND UP AND RAISE YOUR RIGHT
HAND.
I UNDERSTAND WHY SOME OF MY
STATEMENTS GENERATED CONFUSION.
AFTER REVIEWING ALL OF THE
FACTS, INVOLVED IN THE
DISMISSALS OF THE U.S.
ATTORNEYS...
YOUR CHARACTERIZATION OF YOUR
PARTICIPATION IS JUST
SIGNIFICANTLY, IF NOT TOTALLY,
AT VARIANCE WITH THE FACTS."
HOW CAN YOU BE SURE THAT YOU
MADE THE DECISION?
I RECALL MAKING THE DECISION.
WHEN?
SIR, I DON'T RECALL WHEN THE
DECISION WAS MADE.
Moyers: ONE WEEK AFTER THE
TESTIMONY OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, CONGRESS IS STILL
LOOKING FOR CREDIBLE ANSWERS TO
THE  MYSTERY: WHY WERE EIGHT
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS FIRED BY THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT?
ALL POLITICAL APPOINTEES CAN
BE REMOVED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES.
Moyers: AT FIRST, GONZALES
EXPLAINED "THEY SIMPLY LOST MY
CONFIDENCE."
HE CALLED THE WHOLE AFFAIR "AN
OVERBLOWN PERSONNEL MATTER."
BUT THE FIRED PROSECUTORS DIDN'T
LIKE THAT GONZALES HAD
DENIGRATED THEIR JOB
PERFORMANCE, AND THEY TOLD
CONGRESS WHAT THEY THOUGHT.
MS. LAM, DO YOU THINK THAT
YOU WERE INAPPROPRIATELY
REMOVED?
WELL, SENATOR, I THINK THAT
IT WAS UNUSUAL, GIVEN THE
TRADITION AND THE HISTORY OF THE
UNITED STATES ATTORNEYS WITHIN
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
Moyers: THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
HAS INSISTED THERE WAS NOTHING
IMPROPER ABOUT THE FIRINGS, BUT
HIS STORIES ABOUT WHAT HE KNEW
AND HOW MUCH HE WAS INVOLVED
KEPT CHANGING.
I WAS NOT INVOLVED IN SEEING
ANY MEMOS, WAS NOT INVOLVED IN
ANY DISCUSSIONS ABOUT WHAT WAS
GOING ON.
THAT'S BASICALLY WHAT I KNEW AS
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
THAT EXPLANATION JUST DOESN'T
HOLD WATER IF YOU BECOME REALLY
FAMILIAR WITH THE STORY.
Moyers: WHEN GONZALES TRIED
TO DOWNPLAY THE AFFAIR, JOSH
MARSHALL WASN'T BUYING.
HE'S THE EDITOR AND PUBLISHER OF
POPULAR BLOGS THAT FEATURE
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING AND
ANALYSIS, TALKING POINTS MEMO
AND T.P.M. MUCKRAKER.COM.
HE'S BEEN COVERING THIS STORY
ALMOST FROM THE START.
MARSHALL SAYS IT'S ALL ABOUT THE
INTEGRITY OF JUSTICE.
THE PRESIDENT APPOINTS THE
U.S. ATTORNEYS.
THEY'RE POLITICAL IN A CERTAIN
RESPECT.
BUT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,
THE POWER THAT THEY HOLD IS SO
GREAT, IT'S LIFE AND LIMB, YOU
KNOW: PUT YOU IN JAIL, MAKE YOU
RUN UP HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS OF LEGAL COSTS.
EVEN THOUGH WE UNDERSTAND THAT
POLITICAL APPOINTEES TAKE THESE
JOBS, WE DON'T ASSUME THAT THE
PARTY IN POWER IS GOING TO USE
THAT KIND OF POWER TO ADVANCE
ITS POLITICAL INTERESTS.
AND THAT'S WHAT THIS IS ABOUT.
Moyers: MARSHALL AND HIS
REPORTERS BELONG TO A NEW BREED
OF JOURNALISTS.
THEY USE THE SPEED AND BREADTH
OF THE INTERNET TO CONSTANTLY
UPDATE THE STORY, AS THEY DID
LAST WEEK DURING THE TESTIMONY
BY GONZALES.
Moyers: HOW DID YOU GET ON
THIS STORY BEFORE ANYBODY ELSE?
WHAT DREW YOU TO IT?
I THINK THE KEY IS THAT WE
WERE ON THE DUKE CUNNINGHAM
STORY GOING BACK A YEAR AND A
HALF AGO.
Moyers: HE WAS THE MEMBER OF
CONGRESS...
MEMBER OF CONGRESS WHO HAD
THIS FLAGRANT BRIBERY AND NOW IS
SERVING ABOUT A DECADE IN
PRISON.
AND BECAUSE WE WERE ON... WE
FOLLOWED THAT SO CLOSELY, WHEN
WE SAW THAT THE PROSECUTOR WHO
HAD PUT HIM IN PRISON, CAROL
LAM, WHO'S THE FORMER U.S.
ATTORNEY IN SAN DIEGO, WHEN WE
SAW THAT SHE WAS FIRED, THAT SET
OFF ALL SORTS OF ALARM BELLS FOR
US.
Moyers: WHAT SHOCKED YOU
ABOUT IT?
WELL, THAT SOMEONE WHO WAS
INVOLVED IN SO MANY ONGOING
CORRUPTION INVESTIGATIONS THAT
IN VARIOUS WAYS TOUCHED ON THE
ADMINISTRATION, THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION, THAT SOMEONE
LIKE THAT WOULD GET FIRED DURING
THOSE INVESTIGATIONS, THAT
SCREAMED SOME SORT OF TAMPERING.
Moyers: SO, BASED UPON THE
JOURNALISM YOU'VE DONE, WHY DO
YOU THINK CAROL LAM WAS FIRED?
SHE WAS NO LIBERAL DEMOCRAT.
CERTAINLY NOT.
SHE WAS APPOINTED BY GEORGE
BUSH.
I THINK SHE WAS FIRED BECAUSE
SHE WAS TOO INDEPENDENT AND SHE
WAS CREATING... SHE WAS BRINGING
TOO MUCH HEAT ON REPUBLICAN
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND MEMBERS
OF THIS ADMINISTRATION.
SHE WAS DOING HER JOB TOO WELL.
SHE WAS PUTTING TOO MANY CORRUPT
PUBLIC OFFICIALS IN PRISON.
THIS WAS A CRIME OF
UNPRECEDENTED MAGNITUDE AND
EXTRAORDINARY AUDACITY.
Moyers: LAM HAD SUCCESSFULLY
PROSECUTED RANDY "DUKE"
CUNNINGHAM, A TOP REPUBLICAN
MEMBER OF CONGRESS.
HE PLED GUILTY TO ACCEPTING MORE
THAN $2 MILLION IN BRIBES FROM
TWO DIFFERENT DEFENSE
CONTRACTORS.
IT IS ABUNDANTLY CLEAR THAT
CONGRESSMAN CUNNINGHAM LET GREED
TAKE PRIORITY OVER HIS DUTY TO
SERVE THE BEST INTERESTS OF HIS
CONSTITUENTS AND HIS COUNTRY.
Moyers: CUNNINGHAM WAS
SENTENCED TO AN EIGHT-YEAR TERM
IN PRISON.
THE CHAIN OF CONNECTIONS LED TO
YET ANOTHER POWER IN CONGRESS,
THE THEN-CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, JERRY
LEWIS, WHO IS STILL UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
THEN THE GROUND IN WASHINGTON
REALLY SHOOK.
TURNS OUT LAM WAS ALSO AFTER THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, THE
C.I.A.'S NUMBER-THREE MAN: KYLE
"DUSTY" FOGGO, SUSPECTED OF
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST INVOLVING
DEFENSE CONTRACTORS.
F.B.I. AGENTS WERE EVEN SENT TO
C.I.A. HEADQUARTERS TO SEARCH
FOGGO'S OFFICE.
THE DAY AFTER LAM TOLD HER
BOSSES AT THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
ABOUT THE SEARCH WARRANTS, THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHIEF OF
STAFF, KYLE SAMPSON, SENT THIS
CONFIDENTIAL EMAIL TO THE WHITE
HOUSE COMPLAINING ABOUT LAM.
HE WANTED TO DISCUSS THE
"PROBLEM WE HAVE RIGHT NOW WITH
CAROL LAM THAT LEADS ME TO
CONCLUDE WE SHOULD HAVE SOMEBODY
READY" TO REPLACE HER.
AT THIS POINT CUNNINGHAM IS
ALREADY IN PRISON, BUT SHE IS
ONTO PEOPLE THAT CUNNINGHAM WAS
WORKING WITH.
AND THIS HAD BROUGHT HER TO THE
C.I.A., PARTICULARLY A GUY NAMED
DUSTY FOGGO.
JUST A DAY OR TWO BEFORE THIS
EMAIL WAS WRITTEN, SHE HAD
NOTIFIED THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE THAT SHE PLANNED TO
EXECUTE SEARCH WARRANTS ON
C.I.A. HEADQUARTERS.
NOT LONG AFTER THIS HAPPENED,
THE NUMBER THREE RESIGNED.
THE DIRECTOR OF THE C.I.A.
RESIGNED.
IT'S STILL A LITTLE MURKY HOW
ALL THESE THINGS ARE RELATED.
Moyers: EARLIER THIS YEAR,
"DUSTY" FOGGO WAS INDICTED FOR
CORRUPTION ALONG WITH A WELL-
CONNECTED DEFENSE CONTRACTOR.
THE INDICTMENTS CAME TWO MONTHS
AFTER CAROL LAM HAD BEEN FIRED.
WHEN LAM WAS FIRED, AND YOUR
ANTENNA WENT OFF, WHERE DID THE
TRAIL LEAD YOU?
THIS WAS A CASE WHERE OUR
REPORTERS WERE DEEPLY VERSED IN
THESE PUBLIC CORRUPTION
INVESTIGATIONS.
WE HAD BEEN REPORTING ON THESE
CASES FOR OVER A YEAR.
SO THAT GAVE US A CONTEXT TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT WAS HAPPENING.
SO WE PUT OUT THE WORD THAT WE
THOUGHT THERE'S BEEN A BUNCH OF
FIRINGS.
AND WE STARTED GETTING TIPS FROM
READERS.
AND ONE OF THE UNIQUE STRENGTHS
OF OUR JOURNALISM MODEL IS THAT
WE USE OUR READERS A LOT TO DO
BASICALLY SORT OF THE FRONTLINE
RESEARCH FOR US.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN WE JUST TAKE
THINGS PEOPLE SAY AND PRINT THEM
WILLY-NILLY.
BUT THERE'S A WEALTH OF
INFORMATION OUT THERE IN SMALL
METROPOLITAN PAPERS AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
SO THERE WERE REPORTS ABOUT THE
ARKANSAS U.S. ATTORNEY WHO HAD
BEEN FIRED THAT WAS JUST IN A
LOCAL ARKANSAS MEDIA.
AND THERE WAS ANOTHER SIMILAR
CASE WITH THE U.S. ATTORNEY IN
MICHIGAN.
Moyers: HOW MANY REPORTERS DO
YOU HAVE?
DURING MOST OF THIS, WE HAD
TWO REPORTERS WORKING ON THE
STORY.
Moyers: WITH YOU AS EDITOR?
CORRECT.
Moyers: SO WHEN DID YOU
REALIZE THAT THIS WAS MORE THAN
A PERSONNEL STORY AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE?
I THINK THE KEY MOMENT FOR ME
WAS BACK... IT MUST BE A COUPLE
MONTHS AGO NOW, WHEN WE FOUND
OUT THAT DAVID IGLESIAS, THE
FIRED U.S. ATTORNEY IN NEW
MEXICO, HAD SENT AN EMAIL TO A
COLLEAGUE, WHEN HE... AND HE
CALLED HIS FIRING A POLITICAL
FRAGGING, THE WORD THAT YOU USE
WHEN SOLDIERS KILL EACH OTHER...
SOLDIERS ON ONE SIDE KILL EACH
OTHER.
Moyers: MARSHALL FIRST HEARD
ABOUT THIS FROM ANOTHER BLOGGER
IN NEW MEXICO.
AS HE FOLLOWED UP, IT BECAME
APPARENT THAT IGLESIAS, A
REPUBLICAN, HAD BEEN FRAGGED BY
HIS OWN PARTY.
TWO SENIOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
FROM NEW MEXICO, SENATOR PETE
DOMENICI AND REPRESENTATIVE
HEATHER WILSON, HAD TELEPHONED
IGLESIAS ASKING HIM FOR
INFORMATION ABOUT SEALED
INDICTMENTS IN A POLITICALLY
CHARGED INVESTIGATION CONCERNING
STATE DEMOCRATS.
REPRESENTATIVE WILSON, WHO IS
SENATOR DOMENICI'S PROTÉGÉ, WAS
IN A VERY TIGHT RACE FOR
REELECTION THAT SHE EVENTUALLY
WON.
BUT SHE... IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
VERY HELPFUL FOR HER IF A
DEMOCRAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
INDICTED RIGHT BEFORE THE
ELECTION.
THAT'S WHY THEY CALLED HIM.
THAT'S WHY THE SENATOR AND
REPRESENTATIVE CALLED HIM,
LEANED ON HIM TO BRING THE
INDICTMENT.
HE WOULDN'T.
AND I THINK THAT WAS IT.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHY HE GOT
FIRED.
Moyers: IGLESIAS TOLD
CONGRESS HE CONSIDERED THE CALL
FROM DOMENICI HIGHLY IMPROPER.
AND HE WANTED TO ASK ME ABOUT
THE CORRUPTION MATTERS OR THE
CORRUPTION CASES THAT HAD BEEN
WIDELY REPORTED IN THE LOCAL
MEDIA.
I SAID, "ALL RIGHT."
AND HE SAID, "ARE THESE GOING TO
BE FILED BEFORE NOVEMBER?"
AND I SAID I DIDN'T THINK SO.
AND TO WHICH HE REPLIED, "I'M
VERY SORRY TO HEAR THAT."
AND THEN THE LINE WENT DEAD.
SO IN OTHER WORDS, HE HUNG UP ON
YOU?
THAT'S HOW I TOOK THAT.
YES, SIR.
AND YOU DIDN'T SAY GOODBYE OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT?
NO, SIR.
NOW, DID YOU TAKE THAT AS A
SIGN OF HIS UNHAPPINESS WITH
YOUR DECISION?
I FELT SICK AFTERWARD.
SO I FELT HE WAS UPSET THAT...
AT HEARING THE ANSWER THAT HE
RECEIVED.
RIGHT.
AND SO IS IT FAIR TO SAY THAT
YOU FELT PRESSURED TO HURRY
SUBSEQUENT CASES AND
PROSECUTIONS AS A RESULT OF THE
CALL?
YES, SIR.
I DID.
I FELT LEANED ON.
I FELT PRESSURED TO GET THESE
MATTERS MOVING.
AND, AS YOU SAY, IT WAS
UNUSUAL FOR YOU TO RECEIVE A
CALL FROM A SENATOR AT HOME
WHILE YOU WERE THE U.S.
ATTORNEY.
UNPRECEDENTED.
IT HAD NEVER HAPPENED.
Moyers: SENATOR DOMENICI
WASN'T JUST CALLING THE
PROSECUTOR.
HE REACHED OUT TO THE WHITE
HOUSE, WHERE KARL ROVE AND THE
PRESIDENT HAD ALREADY PASSED
ONTO GONZALES COMPLAINTS THAT
IGLESIAS WAS NOT MOVING ON
ALLEGATIONS THAT DEMOCRATS WERE
VOTING IMPROPERLY IN LOCAL
ELECTIONS.
THE FACT THAT HE WOULDN'T
BRING WHAT I THINK WOULD HAVE
CLEARLY BEEN BOGUS INDICTMENTS
PUT HIM ON THE OUTS WITH
REPUBLICAN PARTY OFFICIALS IN
HIS STATE.
AND THAT LED TO A STRING OF
COMPLAINTS FROM REPUBLICANS IN
NEW MEXICO TO KARL ROVE, TO THE
PRESIDENT.
SO HE WAS ALREADY ON THIN ICE.
Moyers: THE SCANDAL HAS GROWN
BEYOND THE ISSUE OF PROSECUTORS
BEING FIRED.
BUT THERE'S A FLIP SIDE TO IT,
AND THAT IS WHO IS BEING HIRED?
WHAT CAN YOU SAY ABOUT THAT?
OVER THE COURSE OF LAST YEAR,
THEY WERE INSTALLING HIGHLY
POLITICAL U.S. ATTORNEYS IN KEY
SWING STATES.
AND IN AT LEAST SOME OF THOSE
CASES, THEY CLEARLY BROUGHT
HIGHLY POLITICIZED PROSECUTIONS.
SO THE EIGHT U.S. ATTORNEYS IS
SORT OF LIKE THE BIG RED FLAG.
AND IT'S THE HEADLINE.
BUT IF YOU LOOK BENEATH THERE,
THERE'S A DEEPER POLITICIZATION
THAT I THINK WAS HAPPENING
THROUGHOUT THE US ATTORNEY
SYSTEM.
CONSIDER THIS DOCUMENT NOW IN
THE HANDS OF CONGRESS.
IT'S A LIST KEPT BY THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT OF ALL THE U.S.
ATTORNEYS WHO HAVE SERVED UNDER
PRESIDENT BUSH.
ALONG WITH NAMES, IT INCLUDES
NOTES ABOUT PROSECUTION,
JUDICIAL AND POLITICAL
EXPERIENCE.
THEN, THERE'S THIS ADDITIONAL,
AND SURPRISING, COLUMN
INDICATING WHETHER OR NOT THEY
ARE MEMBERS OF THE FEDERALIST
SOCIETY.
THE FEDERALIST SOCIETY IS
THIS CONSERVATIVE LEGAL
ORGANIZATION.
AND I THINK, FOR THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION, BEING A MEMBER
OF THE FEDERALIST SOCIETY MEANT
YOU WERE A RELIABLE,
IDEOLOGICAL, PARTISAN
REPUBLICAN.
IT WASN'T ENOUGH JUST TO BE
REGISTERED AS A REPUBLICAN, OR
TO BE... HAVE A GENERALLY
CONSERVATIVE JUDICIAL PHILOSOPHY
OR PROSECUTORIAL PHILOSOPHY.
IT MEANT THAT, BASICALLY MEANT
THAT YOU WERE A REAL MOVEMENT
CONSERVATIVE, A PARTY REGULAR.
THAT'S WHAT BEING A FEDERALIST
SOCIETY MEMBER MEANS.
Moyers: A NETWORK OF KINDRED
SPIRITS.
YEAH.
IT'S BEING ONE OF THE... IT'S
BEING A MEMBER OF THAT TEAM IN
THEIR EYES.
AND IT'S NO ACCIDENT THAT
THERE'S THAT LINE IN KYLE
SAMPSON'S EMAIL WHERE HE TALKS
ABOUT MOST OF THE U.S. ATTORNEYS
BEING LOYAL BUSHIES.
THAT'S REALLY WHAT IT COMES DOWN
TO: BEING POLITICAL, THAT KIND
OF POLITICAL LOYALTY.
Moyers: MARSHALL'S CASE IN
POINT: TIMOTHY GRIFFIN.
ATTORNEY GENERAL GONZALES PICKED
HIM LAST YEAR TO REPLACE THE
FIRED PROSECUTOR IN LITTLE ROCK,
ARKANSAS.
GRIFFIN'S REPUTATION WAS AS A
HIGHLY PARTISAN OPERATIVE, FIRST
DOING OPPOSITION RESEARCH FOR
THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE, AND THEN AS KARL
ROVE'S DEPUTY IN THE WHITE
HOUSE.
ACCORDING TO AN INTERNAL JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT E-MAIL, GETTING
GRIFFIN APPOINTED AS U.S.
ATTORNEY WAS IMPORTANT TO KARL.
THIS, I THINK, IS AN EXAMPLE
OF, A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY, "WELL,
THEY'RE POLITICAL APPOINTEES."
THERE'S A DIFFERENCE, THOUGH,
BETWEEN BEING A POLITICAL
APPOINTEE AND PUTTING A
POLITICAL OPERATIVE IN CHARGE OF
A U.S. ATTORNEY'S OFFICE.
I MEAN AN EXAMPLE IS: I THINK
JAMES CARVILLE IS AN ATTORNEY.
BUT, NO, IT WOULDN'T PASS A
LAUGH TEST TO MAKE JAMES
CARVILLE A U.S. ATTORNEY IN
WASHINGTON D.C.
HE WOULDN'T HAVE CREDIBILITY.
HE'S TOO POLITICAL.
Moyers: AND IS TIM GRIFFIN IN
THAT CATEGORY OF A POLITICAL
OPERATIVE?
OH, ABSOLUTELY.
Moyers: SUCH A PARTISAN
BACKGROUND FOR A SENSITIVE
PROSECUTOR'S POST MADE IT
UNLIKELY THAT GRIFFIN'S
NOMINATION WOULD PASS SENATE
CONFIRMATION.
BUT THE WHITE HOUSE HAD A WAY
AROUND THAT OBSTACLE.
EARLIER IN THE YEAR, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT HAD SEEN TO IT THAT
AN OBSCURE PROVISION WAS SNEAKED
INTO THE PATRIOT ACT.
BASICALLY, THEY SLIPPED A
PROVISION IN THAT ALLOWS THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL TO MAKE INTERIM
APPOINTS THAT LAST THROUGHOUT
THAT PRESIDENT'S TERM.
IT'S AS SIMPLE AS THAT.
IT BASICALLY...
Moyers: WHAT'S WRONG WITH IT?
WELL, WE HAVE A SYSTEM OF
CHECKS AND BALANCES.
THE SENATE IS SUPPOSED TO
SIGN... IT'S SUPPOSED TO APPROVE
NOMINEES FOR U.S. ATTORNEY
NOMINEES IN THE SAME WAY THAT
THE PRESIDENT DOESN'T JUST
APPOINT THE SECRETARY OF STATE;
HE APPOINTS THE SECRETARY OF
STATE AND THEN THE CONGRESS
VOTES.
AND IF THE CONGRESS APPROVES
THAT PERSON, THAT PERSON BECOMES
SECRETARY OF STATE.
THEY WERE GETTING RID OF THE
ADVICE AND CONSENT DIMENSION TO
THE U.S. JUSTICE SYSTEM.
Moyers: SO WHAT DO YOU THINK
WAS GOING THROUGH THEIR MIND
THAT WOULD CAUSE THEM TO THINK
"WE CAN GET AWAY WITH IT.
NOBODY'S GOING TO NOTICE IT.
EIGHT PROSECUTORS HAVE BEEN
FIRED, AND MAKE A NATIONAL STORY
OUT OF IT."
I THINK IT'S REALLY TWO
ISSUES.
ONE IS THAT THIS ADMINISTRATION
HAS HAD UNIFIED POLITICAL
CONTROL IN WASHINGTON FOR ALMOST
ALL OF THE SIX YEARS THEY'VE
BEEN IN OFFICE.
AND THAT MEANS THEY WEREN'T USED
TO CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT.
THEY WEREN'T USED TO HAVING
COMMITTEE CHAIRMEN WHO SEND OUT
SUBPOENAS AND FORCE PEOPLE UP TO
CAPITOL HILL TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS.
THE OTHER PART OF THAT STORY IS
IT'S NOT JUST THE CONGRESS THAT
FELL DOWN ON THE JOB IN
OVERSIGHT.
IT WAS THE PRESS.
YOU SEE THIS IN THE BUILDUP TO
THE WAR IN THE IRAQ: HOW LITTLE
CRITICAL SCRUTINY THAT THE
EVIDENCE, THE SUPPOSED EVIDENCE
FOR WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
GOT.
SO I THINK ON THE PRESS SIDE AND
ON THE CONGRESSIONAL SIDE, THE
WHITE HOUSE HAD GOTTEN USED TO
GETTING AWAY WITH A LOT OF
STUFF.
Moyers: SPEAKING OF
CREDIBILITY, YOU ARE A LIBERAL.
YOU DON'T HIDE THE FACT THAT
YOU'RE A LIBERAL.
PEOPLE WHO AREN'T LIBERAL OUT
THERE, HOW... CAN THEY TRUST
YOUR REPORTING?
I THINK THEY CAN.
I THINK THAT WE HAVE... I THINK
THAT OUR ORGANIZATION HAS A
TRACK RECORD.
WE... LAST YEAR THERE WERE ALL
SORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS OF
CORRUPT REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS.
THERE WERE ALSO INVESTIGATIONS
OF ALLEGEDLY CORRUPT DEMOCRATS.
AND I THINK IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT
WE REPORTED ON WE WERE JUST AS
AGGRESSIVE REPORTING THOSE
STORIES AS WE WERE ONES WHO WERE
REPUBLICANS.
HOW I SEE OUR... HOW I SEE OUR
MISSION IS WE ALWAYS WANT TO BE
TRANSPARENT WITH READERS ABOUT
WHAT WE THINK, ABOUT OUR
OPINIONS.
BUT, FUNDAMENTALLY, WE ARE OUT
THERE TO COLLECT AND REPORT
FACTS.
AND THAT'S ALWAYS OUR GUIDING
MISSION.
Moyers: IF GONZALES LEAVES,
AS SO MANY PEOPLE ARE SAYING HE
MUST, INCLUDING REPUBLICANS...
RIGHT.
Moyers: ...WILL THE STORY BE
OVER?
I DON'T THINK IT WILL BECAUSE
THIS STORY IS ABOUT THE WHITE
HOUSE, THE POLITICAL BRAIN
CENTER OF THIS ADMINISTRATION
USING THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
TO PURSUE ITS POLITICAL ENDS.
THE REASON ALBERTO... WHAT
ALBERTO GONZALES HAD DONE WRONG
IS HE HAD ALLOWED THAT TO
HAPPEN.
HE HAD ALLOWED THE PRESIDENT...
HE HAD ALLOWED KARL ROVE TO
MISUSE, TO REALLY CORRUPT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
SO HE WAS A COG IN THE MACHINE.
BUT THE REAL STORY HERE IS
REALLY RIGHT TO THE TOP.
IT'S IN THE WHITE HOUSE.
IT'S THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION
USING THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
TO ADVANCE THE INTERESTS OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
Moyers: TALKING TO JON
STEWART AND JOSH MARSHALL ABOUT
JOURNALISM, I FELT EVEN MORE
SADNESS OVER THE DEATH THIS WEEK
OF DAVID HALBERSTAM.
40 YEARS AGO, HE COVERED THE WAR
IN VIETNAM WHILE I WAS PART OF
THE GOVERNMENT WAGING IT.
HE GOT IT RIGHT; WE DIDN'T.
THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST,
ABOUT WHOM HE WROTE A DEFINING
BOOK, WERE SURE OF THEIR
ARGUMENTS.
HALBERSTAM WAS SURE OF HIS
SENSES.
HE FELT, SAW, TOUCHED, AND
BREATHED THE WAR HE WAS
COVERING.
WASHINGTON SPOKE OF FALLING
DOMINOS, CONTAINING COMMUNISM,
AND WINNING HEARTS AND MINDS.
HE WROTE OF BROKEN BODIES,
FRIGHTENED AND LONESOME
SOLDIERS, OF FRUSTRATION AND
FUTILITY.
FOR REPORTING WHAT HE SAW, HIS
PATRIOTISM WAS IMPUGNED.
PRESIDENTS TRIED TO GET HIM
FIRED FROM HIS JOB-- A FOOLISH
NOTION, BECAUSE FOR DAVID
HALBERSTAM JOURNALISM WAS A
CALLING, NOT A JOB.
YOU COULDN'T FIRE HIM AND HE
WOULDN'T QUIT.
WE GOT TO KNOW EACH OTHER AFTER
I MOVED TO NEW YORK IN THE LATE
'60s.
WE WERE BORN JUST TWO MONTHS
APART IN THE SAME YEAR AND WERE
SOUTHERNERS.
SO WE TALKED ABOUT HOW OUR
COUNTRY HAD BEEN TORN APART
BECAUSE THE TRUTH OF SLAVERY HAD
BEEN DRIVEN FROM THE CLASSROOM,
THE PULPIT, AND THE NEWSROOM.
WE TALKED ABOUT HOW OFFICIALS
AND JOURNALISTS LIVE IN PARALLEL
BUT SEPARATE REALITIES; THEY SEE
AND TALK TO EACH OTHER, MAY HAVE
A MEAL AND GOSSIP TOGETHER, BUT
THEIR WORLDS NEVER TOUCH BECAUSE
OFFICIALS USE WORDS THAT DON'T
MEAN WHAT THEY SAY, WHILE FOR
THOSE REPORTERS IN VIETNAM--
HALBERSTAM, PETER ARNETT, MORLEY
SAFER,  OTHERS--  WORDS WERE
VESSELS OF  REALITY.
MORE THAN ANYONE ELSE, HE HELPED
ME TO SEE THAT THE FURTHER YOU
GET FROM POWER, THE CLOSER YOU
COME TO THE TRUTH.
SO THE SADNESS ONE FEELS IS
PERSONAL AT THE LOSS OF A FRIEND
AND MENTOR.
BUT LET THE GRIEF BE PUBLIC
BECAUSE EVEN IF YOU DIDN'T KNOW
HIM, THE DEATH OF SO HONEST AND
COURAGEOUS A REPORTER LEAVES
AMERICA A LITTLE MORE
VULNERABLE.
LET'S LISTEN NOW TO SOME VOICES
YOU'LL BE HEARING IN THE WEEKS
TO COME.